I'm an astronut and I explore space I'm
going to Mars but when I came down I saw
flames it's like going over niagar Falls
in a barrel but while you're on
fire let me throw a little monkey wrench
in this as usual if not all of us fear
the risk of death at the same level and
it opens up Horizons for the rest of us
who aren't that brave can you imagine
and you're getting and they're say well
what will we do and the the engineers
down on Earth is say well try this and
try that and you're going to die I mean
the chances were incredible that's why
they're Heroes that's why they're here
that's why they're
[Applause]
[Music]
here this past December 2024 I was on a
ship to
Antarctica that's one of my bucket list
items and I couldn't resist because
there were some notables on board
and I said this would make a good Star
Talk episode so I snared the one and
only William Shatner Captain Kirk uh I
don't know if you know but he is a big
fan of exploration and also on board was
NASA astronaut Scott Kelly you may
remember he's a twin with Mark Kelly and
both of them have been in space but
Scott Kelly in
particular was sent into orbit into the
International Space Station for 340 days
almost an entire year he holds the
record for continuous time and space for
an American for some people Captain Kirk
included risk is their business it's a
conversation I'm having with both of
them Four Star Talk on board a ship to
Antarctica check it out Scott we're in
the Drake Passage right now could you
give us a little background on that why
why are we listening
why are we feel nausea what's going on
here on Earth yeah well the uh you know
the Drake passages is the part of the uh
Southern Ocean where um at the tip
between South America and Antarctica
Cape Horn the tip yeah mhm where but
where this where the uh the Pacific and
the Atlantic oceans meet and it's very
deep here which causes uh you know with
the prevailing winds that are generally
west to east some pretty big swells and
I think we're seeing about
I don't know maybe 14 15t right now but
they can get as high as 50 ft In this
passage oo so we're in a we're in a a
cruise ship what would this passage have
been like in a wooden ship a hundred
years ago you wouldn't want to do
it but risk is our business yes I said
that yeah I think it would be pretty
harrowing um you know in this kind of
even in this sea state in a in a ship
like that but I can't imagine being at
the you know swells of 4050 ft I was
just talking to my brother on the phone
this is your twin brother twin brother
you know when I last interviewed you on
Star Talk I said which brother are you
you said you're the good-looking brother
yeah that's still true okay yeah but
anyway he was telling me about being in
the the North Atlantic on a cargo ship
cuz we were both when we were younger uh
training to be Merchant Mariners in 80
foot seas and losing you know 20
containers off the ship so if you think
this is bad just imagine that so
now Mr Shatner my dear your show the
original Star Trek series in the
1960s was coincident with while we
were priming our space program to go to
the
moon and but as far as you're show was
concerned we were already there space
was not a question about whether it
should happen it had already happened it
was a matter of learning to speak Kling
on as many fans of the show managed I I
can't count myself among those who are
fluent and nor I so were you just an
actor at the time or did you participate
in emotionally in this idea that
exploration is in our DNA exploration
doesn't necessarily mean going to Mars
and colonizing Mars you can explore for
example may I spend a moment on
exploration and why expression um a
while ago some years ago I heard a story
of a ranger in the in the forest in the
sieras uh occupying a cabin and he was
there I guess for fire observation and
while he was living in the cabin alone
uh Deer uh came and ate the grass around
and then one deer poked his its head in
the window to see who was there and and
he struck up a conference and had a
relationship with the herd of deer and
discovered that deer had posted types of
Personality there was the Diplomat deer
who poked his head in to see what was
going on there was the guard deer there
was a deer you know well so these the
this herd group had assigned roles that
he discovered that my goodness uh that's
how we organize ourselves when we were
on the most the last island with the
Penguins on this Voyage having just
returned from Antarctica on this Voyage
of exploration for all of us for me
certainly of discovering new worlds new
whatever that whatever the language was
and seeing new
civilizations which were the
Penguins and a penguin came up to the
group that was standing having landed
and the
Penguin Mark what are you doing here you
know was that what it was saying he was
this was the Diplomat penguin okay and I
thought of course this whole thing is is
a circle of life and and here's a
penguin acting like the deer and the
Ranger and us and and the circle I
thought wow what an what a discovery of
we're in
this arid land that's rif with life but
you can't see too much of it but it's
there and the penguins are a big part of
it and and it's exploration and I was a
discovery and I had the best time okay
so what what you're saying here
implicitly and EXP itly is that humans
aren't the only curious animals out
there that's right the penguin was
exploring it was exploring in its own
way no in it was exploring in a very
explicit way what are you guys doing
here you're two legs do you you don't
waddle well some of us waddle but we
point to me that I waddle I don't want
let's go back 60 years ago you're an
actor by the way by the way I don't know
if you knew this but
William Shatner appeared in two distinct
episodes of The Twilight Zone yes and
quite memorable episodes at that
predating of course the Star Trek series
you're an actor in Hollywood yes and so
was there anything in particular that
Drew you to the part you're talking
about Star Trek yeah Star Trek I was in
New York doing something uh in New York
and uh they had made a pilot of Star
Trek and NBC didn't want to buy the
pilot uh but they didn't they were they
had faults with it but they loved the
idea and they wanted for the first time
I'd never heard of it before I've never
heard of it since they said we'll give
you another whatever the cost was to
make another pilot recast it all and
they called me I was in New York they
called me would I come to Hollywood to
see this thing that they had made with
the idea of playing the captain so so I
was like ushered in can I presume you
had no idea what impact that would have
on our culture at the time none
whatsoever and I saw the thing that NBC
had turned down I thought that's pretty
darn good it's a little pedantic it's a
little you know here we are sailing the
five oceans but whereas the guys in the
capsules are all friendly and you know
there isn't this distance between them
so I suggested little more camaraderie
and humor and and we sold the pilot so
when I when I look at this uh by the way
if I don't know if anybody's ever been
to Comic-Con uh the one at least in San
Diego I don't know if they also do this
in New York the very last session is a
Starship
Smackdown where every single Starship
spaceship ever appeared in fictional
storytelling is put up on display like
drawings of them photos of them and you
vote there are people arguing the case
of one ship or another of which is the
greatest of
ships the year the Starship Enterprise
won that what carried the day was a
simple
fact that no ship before then ever
displayed in
storytelling was ever designed to just
explore
every ship you ever see someone get into
and out of in a science fiction movie or
story it's designed to take you to a
destination that's why those ships
existed so this this as a concept it's
like oh my gosh exploration was
Paramount in why the ship existed at all
right it was designed I I meaning what
you've said is is valid the truth truth
of the matter is the designer of the
ship had designed many versions put them
on a wall and invited all the executives
in to see which aspect of which drawing
they loved and then he combine what
everybody loves it was like a a pot
perie of uh oh I didn't know that yeah
NASA's done that before I
think say that again so Nas has done
that before that's why they get space
shuttle is an amalgam of ideas stapled
together pretty much it's a noble
looking ship the the these the the it's
got It's got it looks like it should go
someplace unfortunately it's not powered
right yeah the space shuttle Orbiter
it's got wings and and Jet nozzles out
the back so it seems to me wherever you
are you ought to be able to choose let's
go someplace new and in fact that's what
they did in the film
Armageddon yes but in real life once
they start their approach they they okay
they got to land it that's that's one of
the reasons why
Armageddon violated more known laws of
physics per minute than any other film
ever made so uh just tell me about the
space shuttle what it meant if its only
job as as fun and versatile as it looked
if its only job was to get you to orbit
that's not that wasn't its only job oh
please so the space shuttle is one of
the most is the most uh diverse
spacecraft we've ever built and probably
will be so In Our Lifetime but it has
one serious limitation it's heavy and it
doesn't carry enough fuel to get out of
low earth orbit but it does launch
people it La launches cargo it can build
things it built an International Space
Station it can be its own science
laboratory you can do space Walks from
it by and that cargo bay is huge as far
as I can tell because it launched it
deployed the Hubble Space Telescope and
my favorite my favorite size analog to
this Hubble Telescope it's about the
size of a Greyhound bus which means you
could lower a Greyhound bus into the
payload of the shuttle yeah something
that weighed up to 50,000 pounds whereas
the soy use if you use that as the the
counter example this Russian Russian
soyou spacecraft is really only designed
to launch three people and a very small
amount of cargo and that's it does it
very well but it doesn't do very much
you've been up more than once have you
been up on each of those craft twice on
each twice on each yeah so now maybe
because the soos is not as complex as
the shuttle and the Orbiter and the the
solid rocket boosters the the soy has
the best safety record of any
space rocket they've had two fatal
inlight accidents just like the space
shuttle but less people okay uh similar
number of flights but Oh I thought they
had many more flights okay I didn't know
that you know there's no greater gift we
can give our children than the freedom
to explore and develop a lifelong
passion for learning that's why we're
excited to have kiwi Co supporting
today's episode kiwi Co clubs are
designed to spark Innovation and
creativity through Hands-On stem
projects each monthly crate is packed
with crafts experiments engineering
challenges models and games and with
five different kiwi C clubs to choose
from there's something for every age and
curious mind and for kids who love
diving deep into science and engineering
kiwi cabs brings realworld Concepts to
life with exciting projects designed by
Educators engineers and even rocket
scientists from chemistry to robotics
each crate builds knowledge and
confidence through fun engaging
experiences now because my child takes
after her mom she's already a genius so
I just like that we have something that
we can do and spend time together and
she always tells me how proud she is of
me when we're done like I said uh she's
the smart one but seriously it's a lot
of fun and it strengthens our love of
stem so visit the link on screen or use
code stalk at checkout to get 50% off
your first monthly crate that's kiwi
cod.com
StarTalk for 50% off the gift of
learning creativity and
exploration and now why don't you
explore the rest of the show where do
this fit with you we know we learned
earlier on this Voyage you gave a a
marvelous talk uh reviewing Shackleton
the Explorer to the Antarctic and the
trials and tribulations he went through
and no one died after he got stuck in
the ice and he's a bit of a hero of
yours as we all felt and mine too
so here's someone who's gone where no
one has gone before oh I've heard that
Bly boldly boldly gone where no one has
gone before sorry he's right and and you
sound so good on the on the track is
that you narrating it that was me B go
oh my God that was you though right that
was that was right with the very famous
split
infinitive boldly go go boldly yeah and
later in the later films they said to go
boldly well I wrote book called A boldly
go yeah no we love that and when they
tried to fix the grammar in a later
movie it was like no that's just just
deal doesn't work that way you we're
talking about ships and its efficiency
uh I was invited to the cape uh uh one
time roll out the r Canaveral Florida
yeah yeah to where they would launch all
our spaceships and and in the center of
one of those uh hangers uh on a platform
was the lunar Excursion module the lamb
but up the stairs and they invited me in
to the LM which looks like whatever you
call it you know the uh pergola uh yes
exactly it looks it's the simplest
little and you get inside and they have
a hammock to lie down I lay down on the
hammock and it's this ridiculous
children's
toy and it's got more instruments more
complications of and
that's the result from the shuttle to
the spaceship to the thing and the mod
they've got a little garden tool thing
to land on the moon get out there take a
picture get back in and then meet up
with the whatever we call it the thing
circulating Command
Module then they get out of the limb
into the into the ship that's going to
take them uh back to the back to Earth
and this what happens to the oh that's
been let no no what happens to it
crashes into the Moon it crashes into
the moon that's how eventually I guess
however if memory serves Apollo
13 realized that for their life support
they needed some of the life support
that was on the lamb so that ad Mission
subsequent to Apollo 13 didn't they keep
the lamb a little further in towards
Earth to make sure is that what happened
I I don't remember used to use life
support systems to you know save
themselves the life support systems on
the LM they had to do some modifications
but they were able to use that to you
know safely get back there can you
imagine you're getting and they're
saying well what will we do and the the
engineers down on Earth are saying well
try this and try that and you're going
to die um but but when you when you talk
about exploration and the means of
exploration from the the uh what's his
name Thor hidle uh using Papyrus as a
raft and then getting to
all Shackleton in a wooden boat and here
we are on this modern liner which was
being explained by you that the engines
here are of particular make and because
we don't hear the engines propelling
this boat as we are right now going back
to uh yua we don't hear the engines
except so often and I didn't understand
why you hear a when we're parked you
hear a rumble I think what is that is
that the anchor going down the it's not
well station keeping it's the station
keeping from yeah so you could drop an
anchor but if you don't need to then why
right and now we know exactly where the
boat is we it's not my boat captain
knows all the means of exploration going
on the variety of things that were using
to explore well let me let me throw a
little monkey wrench in this as usual
if if you know that much about where
you're
going and it could be done in the safety
and comfort of a luxury ship then is it
really
exploration if the res if the if the
risks have been res reduced to zero mean
if you're rowing in an open boat you're
more exploring than getting uh uh if
you're going where no one has gone
before that is exploration if you
attempting tasks that have never been
attempted before Scott goes into orbit
He's a guinea pig for the doctors on
Earth because he's got a twin brother
we're going to learn about no one had
done that before with a twin brother
that's incredible what an incredible
thing so your brother was not the guinea
pig you were cuz you're in space and
you're exposed to Cosmic r what happen
what happened to you well I was exposed
to the environment he was he was the
guinea pig on Earth that was a compl
telling yourself that he's he's chilling
on the the safety of Earth's surface and
you're not and you know he had people
following him around the country and
taking all kinds of samples and having
to leave stuff outside his front door
and also was like the lowest stuff
outside his front door we figured what
that is yeah for people to pick up Lois
uh lowest paid government employee at
the time cuz they had the to pay him so
he was making minimum wage because he
was no longer a NASA astronaut so I
really have to hand it to him to do that
whereas I was like getting all the Glory
by being in space but also like you
mentioned the radiation yeah but your
heart is smaller than it was when you
went in there yeah stuff happened to you
yeah it grew back it did but as my wife
Amo says it's good thing I started with
a big heart
oh that's great I just want to
understand this so even though the
exploration was not in the realm of
place it was in the realm of physiology
it's exploratory physiology exploration
I agree I agree I agree so what did we
learn by exploring what happens to your
body in orbit for how many days uh on
that mission 340 340 they couldn't stay
an extra 25 days and call it a year I
wanted to but the Russians had a certain
schedule they had to meet so we had to
come back CU you were you came back on
the sters yeah let me remind people the
soyers does not land in water they just
land on land they crash land on the yeah
it's really not a
landing well it's he Lage if you walk
away it's an it's a land it's a it's
it's the ultimate e ticket ride uh when
that parachute opens and if I hated
being in space every minute for that
entire 340 days I do it all over again
for the last 20 minutes really just the
the thrill last 20 minutes of coming
back to Earth you what was that like
well this when the parachute opens
you're just you just tumble and are
thrown around like crazy and there have
been I I know one of one particular
person I'm sure other people have felt
this way who was an experienced test
pilot I'm not going to say the person's
name because I don't want to embarrass
him but he was not apparently not
briefed on how Dynamic The Landing is
and he started screaming because he
thought he was going to die High
or low and guttural I wasn't there yeah
because there's Flames coming out of the
the tile right it's like going over
Niagara Falls in a barrel but while
you're on
fire and as soon as you I mean the
Flames are coming up through the windows
you're on fire that's while you're
slowing down on but not but shoot opens
a little bit later the shoot opens later
than this oh I understand that but in
that moment when I was screaming
Flames are coming up you're burning up
and you don't know whether the tiles are
glued down and up they may be flipping
out the tiles may be they Lo they lost
some tiles there's a lot of things you
don't know that's going on you're you're
you're from the inside you don't see
what it's going on the outside you might
not want to know what what what was it
like to have so three of you in the ship
right and one guy's
going what's that like wasn't there on
that one but I it was only uh you know
reported afterwards that this particular
person was he did they say you can't do
that I don't know blck going on then you
might not I'm an astrad and I explore
space I'm going to Mars but when I came
down I saw
Flames but I I still want to get to the
bottom of the advancing a space front
by learning what's happening to your
physiology so oh
yeah yeah heart shrunk 25% changes to my
telm 25% wow Tel that's like the end of
your DNA or something really an
indication of your physical age as you
get older they get shorter more afraid
initially NASA thought that was due to
the controlled diet and exercise later
you know we learned that there were some
uh some worms that the Japanese were
doing telr experiments on too and their
telr got better while they were on the
space station never once saw them
working out on a treadmill or doing any
kind of exercise so it turns out it was
actually the radiation most important
result that I always want everyone to
understand and point out is after
spending a year in space like you
mentioned earlier I am now not only
smarter but more handsome than my
brother
Mark would he agree to that probably not
okay this idea of pushing the limits of
not only what a machine can do but what
human physiology can do uh this is
exploration and who and who you you yes
sir yes now the oldest person to ascend
above the there again I am not my
telares are very long okay but let me
ask you this when I saw you go up the
ladder to go
into into the to the the the blue origin
capsule yes you know and I said this man
is 89 years old how old were you for
that flight I don't know 32 something
like that no times three no wait a
minute I'm walking up the stairs to go
and they're V something's venting out of
a pipe out of the side of the ship side
of the ship what's that
hydrogen
hydrogen the
the Zeppelin the hind the Hindenberg
burned and hydrogen was what was burning
yeah and I'm looking at this plus some
there was some uh coating of aluminum
powder on the surface to make it highly
reflected static electricity up had you
been in Russia Not only would the thing
be venting the fuel there'd be people
smoking cigarettes right at the bottom
of the launch
pad let us be candid with ourselves that
part of the risk of
exploring on some level is even the risk
of even starting the trip if you
exploring you're ready to die because
you're going at some level you got to be
ready to die here you
go what probability of death would you
have
accepted what's the highest probability
of death you would have accepted to do
that mission to to launch on the space
shuttle yes well I launched on the space
shuttle I was STS
103 and so we had approximately 103 uh
prior missions and there was one fatal
accident so that's a 1% chance of dying
yes um what would I have accepted
certainly not 50% 10% maybe maybe it
depend it would depend on what we were
doing well that's an interesting
question yes because death is so
permanent you lose the bet it's 10 to
one you don't just pay up oh here here's
the 100 I owe
you it's your life yeah 1% is not
acceptable nothing is acceptable I'm
going up I'm a test pilot I've tested
This Plane I've tested this thing I know
it works I'm not going up to die I'm
going to
explore that has to be your attitude
that has to be your at that's what you
come to terms with like I would think
about it leading up to my first flight
with uh you know the you you kind of
rationalize hey for one I want to do
this I think it's important I want to
serve my country it's my job I'm a test
pilot uh there is risk uh my brother and
I used to tra tra uh exchange those like
death letters for our families like if
the thing blows up give this to my you
know wife and children and we do the we
would do the same fortunately never uh
had to use those but it's you know
everything has thing in NASA is that a
thing death letters maybe I don't know
thing with my brother and I you're a
test pilot so you've run that it's a new
airplane and you're testing the airplane
so you run that airplane along the
runway the front now you're a foot up
the ground you make a circle and get you
10 ft 20t 30 then you're 50 ft by that
time you know the plane works you go up
to Mar you KN you know it worked it
might not continue to work as you expand
out the now now you press a button you
eject I mean the chances of living now
let's go to Mars's guys okay Flames
scream ah flames and then finally you
into orbit and you're going towards
Mars you're going to
die meteorites
radiation landing on Mars This is why we
have Engineers you may die what you're
not definitely going to die you may die
it's why we have Engineers fig out
you're going to die the chances of you
surviving a meteorite hit or lasting 6
months on Mars with all that radiation
and then getting back in and saying oh
more Flames we got to get get lift off
you know get out of orbit of I mean a
land on Earth you're going to
die okay none of us want to hear you say
that who uttered the words to boldly go
in you're going to
die boldly go boldly go to your death
and if you don't die we'll congratulate
you and we'll tell you your telar are
lengthening you know take this back to
Antarctica they're they're on the Open
Seas there could be monsters in the
ocean there could be
weather patterns they've never thought
of or predicted they don't know how much
food they'll actually need they don't
even know if there will be food there D
coined the word catabatic or anabatic
what does that mean 100 mph winds coming
down wind or 100 m hour is going up 100
m hour winds you got you're in a robo
for crying out loud you got a sale s's
good for 15 knots hey 20 knots you're
going to blow your sales out 30 knots
your master crash
you're going to
die so what I have come to learn yes
being a member of the species that we
call Homo sapiens not all of
us fear the risk of death at the same
level wait a minute well hang on no very
simple there are people who Ascend Mount
Everest knowing there's a real chance
they're going to die they got oxygen
they've got parkas they're going to
slide down on their ass down the the
glacier to get back to Camp there
there's they've got Sherpas who go up
without oxygen run up and run back if
you need some help sir I'll help you
says a
sherpa they probably give the you know
all those National Geographic specials
where they show someone ascending the
mountain for the first time but there's
a camera already there when they get up
to the top so who got the camera camera
got there first the sherper the sherper
and the camera got there first EX but
what I'm saying is there're people who
jump out of airplanes willingly people
who rock climb but they have a parachute
they're not going they I this thing's
going to open how about that guy that
jumped out of he 50,000 yeah bungard
Felix bungard who by the way he was
scared he was a GU he was
dead scared he was going to die the
moment he started twisting I'm going to
die of centrifugal Forest how would you
like to die of centrifugal Forest your
blood comes out of your ear
[Music]
I had Felix bumgardner on Star Talk did
you yeah see check our archives and he's
a pretty good guy I thought he'd be a
little weird or crazy what was he
exploring he liked look he liked
exploring the limits of his own body's
tolerance okay so it's like a a rock
climber how many rock climbers live to
40 nobody you know why they're after
that thrill after a while to climb I got
to go further I got to go here's why I
want to take this listen to me some of
us do
that and some of them die those who
don't die figured out how to do it
without dying they'll write about it
there'll be someone documenting it and
it opens up Horizons for the rest of us
who aren't that brave wait a minute and
that's how we got out of don't
understand they're a Jun because risk is
our business I've heard that
the they're Adrenaline Junkies they need
the adrenaline and the adrenaline
doesn't flow after three times dude if
we didn't have them in our species yeah
we'd still be in the cave exactly
they're the explorers and as they
falling they say I'm dying and that's it
but the next person that does it makes
sure that they don't make whatever
mistakes that's exactly they make their
own mistake and that's what that's what
these guys are that's who these that's
who the original group of of astronauts
were I agree with you on the on the one
the oneway mission is not something I
would be interested in having lived in a
in a in an enclosed sealed environment
for a year when you cannot walk outside
you know Earth has like everything
practically for for humans everything to
offer Scott Scott we went 150 years with
people coming from Europe on one way
trips to the new world oh I know it's
for some people it's not for me I would
not want to live on Mars for the rest of
my life however I would watch that
reality show because I think at some
point it's going to turn into like Lord
of the Flies situation oh the the darker
side of what it is to be human so but
that that's what you're on we're on to
an interesting part of this thesis of
what is exploration those who do explore
those not you know the the the the the
the Ranger with the deer and the Penguin
who asked a question that's one kind of
exploration but the Jeopardy of
exploration is something to be discussed
who goes on what could be a one-way trip
these guys didn't know they were they
they they had to know when that guy when
that brave uh uh astronaut was seeing
Flames coming up from the entry point uh
and screaming I'm going to die that's
just his Humanity but he was willing to
go somebody must have said you know son
the uh the the tiles are going to heat
up and you'll probably feel some heat
and it's going to look oh it's okay I
can take that but when you see it
flaming and and you're it's going to
burn your
parachute and you're screaming you're
succumbing to humanity so you don't
always
know where your limits are exactly even
if you have bra leading up to that
exactly your bravado and and but but
that's what that's what this ad
adrenaline is one more rock I can climb
I put my fingers in there I got a grip I
got a grip do I let go with the legs I
don't know whether I can because I can
tell you the only people friends I've
ever had who died prematurely were rock
climbers dying in just such an accid I'm
telling you that's why they do it free
climbing so I grew up in a city the city
was dangerous enough I don't need to add
dangers okay I I already was feeling not
it wasn't the exploration Gene it was a
survival Gene enough so that I don't
need to do something else to put my life
at risk so what is your your Collective
opinion on people who are looking at
like the people are going to go to Mars
The Once the instruments go people are
are going to go for at least a year and
a half wait wait so so Bill I think the
people who want to go to Mars have
already noticed that NASA has plunked an
SUV siiz Rover on Mars following a half
dozen other Rovers that got there before
it and this current Rover brought a
helicopter we so Mars is not some
unbreached place in by Humanity by
Humanity so I think that they're not
thinking they're going to die no but but
they know that the risk like like uh
Scott was saying 1% you know out of 99
99 1% that's pretty good odds I'm not
going to die but would you put the odds
at 50/50 to go to to go to Mars I would
say 5050 is very generous I I agree for
the first ones to Mars I'd agree and I
think that's what they were considering
maybe even for Apollo 11 right Charlie
maybe a 50% chance of success really so
now you're looking at guys in the in the
in the magnificence and they were all
men at at that time in the magnificence
of their manner
they running on the beach they're the
best physical shape they've learned
everything nine uh six uh uh years of
geology Jose was saying wasted on him
because he was Jose the astronaut on
trained to the a warrior degree they are
they are wielding their swords of
intellect like like the ancient Spartans
yes okay yes they're going to die no
1% chance that's what these guys were
that's the original 16 19 what was it
original Seven the original Seven well
the Mercury Seven the original so by the
way AP in the spirit of your exchange
letters of who might die it it within a
few years ago I forgot exactly when it
went public the letter that Nixon was
going to read had Apollo 11 not
successfully left the Moon and if they
if it couldn't launch they'd still be
alive until they died and so you'd be
watching another aspect you couldn't
test that lm's takeoff right the lm's
takeoff was could not have been tested
on Earth well I'm sure they fire the
engine many one six the gravity uh and
and suffering that journey and
Landing Landing but we do have the laws
of physics which work very well for us
yeah it's not just a random
when we ignite it where will it go I
don't know no not where will it go but
will it work was random will it work in
those kind of with that kind of G
starting off and landing and C every
Mission before Apollo 11 was
incrementally leading up to that Landing
right up to Apollo 10 right up to Apollo
10 we we all forgot Apollo 10 but that
one was important it got to the Moon
deployed but if you're in an airplane in
in the density of this air and you can
pull a a switch and eject is far
different from circling the moon and
wondering with this little
collapsible rugala what was it the
little Hut that was that they were going
to live in the Moon live on the moon and
it and and get it to fire to get back
into orbit and then climb from that back
into there and then get from there back
to there I mean the chances were
incredible that's why they're Heroes
that's why they're Heroes that's why
they're
here
exactly you ever wanted one of your
questions on the universe answered we
all have questions about the universe
black holes the quazars quantum
entanglement wormholes there is no end
to the depths of cosmic curiosity well
the entry level of patreon membership
with Star Talk gets you just that I
think it starts at $5 a month you have
access to the question line that reaches
our Cosmic query programming and not
only that we produce a special Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members if you weren't the director of
the Hayden planetarium what do you think
you would be doing what okay but this
have to be another Universe it wouldn't
happen in this universe okay I'd be I'd
be a a songwriter for Broadway musicals
ooh so that's the entry level and the
perks ascend from there uh there's a
level in fact where we send you a an
autographed copy of one of my latest
books uh right now it's Star Messenger
Cosmic perspectives on civilization and
it's signed with my fancy fountain pen
with purple ink so I invite you to just
check the link below and all of that
money goes to our ability to experiment
with new ways of bringing the universe
down to earth so thank you for those who
have already joined and we welcome
others to participate in this Grand
Adventure of what it is to bring the
universe down to earth as always keep
looking up so we're running short on
time here uh one feature of Star Trek in
the original series and it trickled into
other incarnations of it was that there
is a morality tale so each
episode was a a
lesson
in how we treat one another here on
Earth but under the guise of oh it's
just science fiction and it's aliens and
it's so that would get you to comment on
a lot of prevailing
geopolitics social cultural issues
racial issues and favorite episode was
the one where guy was Black and White
and the other guy was white and with
Frank Oran
was in that episode The the aliens were
exactly half black half white and one
group of them were persecuting the other
group why because they were black on the
other half of their bodies and so again
it's just the the space but really
they're mirrors back to civilization
especially there in the 19 60s Civil
Rights Movement was still in full swing
so I I just want to say to be able to to
explore and still do something socially
conscious I think was was with Gene
Roddenberry as the the creative genius
behind it all and and and yes see you
should get a lot of credit but there
were other guys that really worked on
the show okay you know people as a as a
and I was a huge Star Trek fan as a kid
my early memories were watching uh sneak
behind the couch watching Star Trek
episodes when I was like 5 years old
when my mother didn't know my brother
and I were there what were you doing
behind the couch we were just hiding so
she wouldn't see us we were supposed to
be in bed and we would watch and she
would same with me I we we weren't
allowed to watch TV during the week and
it was scary to catch most of it in runs
sake and and Apollo 11 uh memories but
as an astronaut people would sometimes
ask me a simple qu you know the yes no
question or the binary question uh Star
Trek or Star Wars
what was your answer SC I used to say
when I was a young fighter pilot oh
absolutely Star Wars X-Wing Fighter SC
Scott that's really Scott Scott security
could you get him off of this stage
right as I got older test by so you got
to be in your 20s you know I when once I
got into my 40s my 50s you know the the
harsh edges have gotten rubbed off on me
a little bit clearly Star Trek now
because of the very reason you mentioned
and how that show was just so far ahead
of its time decades ahead of it time it
cared about the laws of physics unlike
Star Wars just just to be clear here
just to be I don't want this to go
unrecognized you flew for the Navy
correct correct that I just want to make
sure that's yeah on the table here why
why why is it important that he flew for
the Navy was a fighter P
ohir
Navy much more challenging than being an
Air Force pilot that's why it's
landing on those carriers landing on the
carrier landing on the carrier at night
apparently is the that's the worst the
worst because I once went on a
centrifuge at a um in brandise
University we were doing a show there
and they had a centrifuge and they
didn't put it at its fastest or anything
and I got off and my lunch came out of
me and it was so I realized I was not
unlike this ship right
now I realized I was the inadequate
stuff rather than the right stuff and
but I can handle that cuz I I other
talents I think I can bring this is the
second time I've talked to you in the
last couple of days where your
upchucking has been a
subject is it a are you is it a fetish
with you I mean are you trying to
release something from inside you what
is it I'm I'm exposing my vulnerable
side that's true you are audience that's
all you're letting us see your
insides so I this so we can land This
Plane here if I may use a metaphor from
your or land the Starship I when I look
at the challenges of Shackleton and
other polar explorers it is many
dimensional it is do they it is the
temperature it is the time it is a place
they've never been before do they have
enough food there's all manner of things
that have never been breached before and
it's all rolled up into one Expedition
and that's got to be the scariest thing
ever so can you just comment on that
reflect on how it's one thing to say
Mars is a risk because it's radiation or
maybe I'll get a radiation suit or
something that's one thing but if you
got 20 things that could kill you you
know what it reminds me of I don't
remember which film it's one of these
sci-fi films where their hand oh I
remember excuse me I remember what it
was it was a movie contact based on the
Carl San novel where jod Foster's
character is going to visit the aliens
all right because they sent us a recipe
of how to do that before she gets on
board the the this this newfangled alien
spacecraft they hander this thing to
bite on that where she can kill herself
commit suicide cide pill some kind of it
might have been Cy or I don't remember
what it was but it's and she says you
you think I'm going to travel all the
way just to kill myself and they would
they leveled with her they
said we can list a hundred reasons why
you might want to do this what scares us
are the hundred reasons we can't think
of why you might want to do this I I
want to ask one question about about
that very uh element of torture yes
okay you're dressed in a suit from head
to toe I mean it's air
airtight it's it's water is flowing
through it to cool it the the 200 on on
the thing and your armpit
itches what do you
do uh well you can't do anything the
worst though is something on your face
or it's the face yeah you got to scratch
your cheek and you can't scratch your
cheek what do you do you deal with it
what do you mean deal with it dudee
they're The Right Stuff they're not
going to freak out cuz their face itches
no I don't mind dying but I got to
scratch this itch not something we
really ever talk about yeah but it's so
practical as I understand there was a
variant on the spacit where they had
like a thing where you can maneuver it
from the outside it can scratch I read
about this is that true I don't know
I've never heard I I just heard about
this you may have heard about it he was
in one okay whose word are you going to
a
tape so I've tested this I so I tested I
said to myself if I'm in a space suit
and my face itches I can't scratch it so
I said how long can I go without
scratching a face itch and I would stand
there and initially it's a little
Twitchy yeah but after a while the itch
goes away so I pictured myself as an FBI
agent and I'm hiding in a closet and the
bad guy is in the room and I itch I got
to scratch this thing and he's going to
hear me scratch you wouldn't be a good
FBI no you have to deal with that itch
yeah they shoot through the closet and
then you be removed from the absolutely
here you got an itch where is it I found
you can resist itches if you wait long
enough the itch goes away is that right
I have found I did the experiment at
least on myself right so now we've
covered that all all of my shows when
they have fun folks on I want to give
you a chance to ask me a question about
astrophysics only because there aren't
many astrophysicists in the world that
in fact if you do the numbers is one in
a million people in the world is an
astrophysicist so if you're ever in the
same space as one of you better ask your
my ambition is to sit down and talk with
you about Astro all the stuff I have no
comprehension about that you do I
there's so much to learn from ask me one
question now I can't think of one no
no Scott first yeah I wanted to clear
something up with you Neil uh oh clear
something up from Twitter October 9th in
2020 22 after the Top Gun movie came out
you said late to the party here but in
this year's Top Gun movie Tom Cruz
character Maverick ejects from a
Hypersonic plane at Mach 10.5 before it
crashed mael he survived with no
injuries at that air speed his body
would splatter like a chain mail glove
swatting a worm just saying and then I
responded to it and I said began the
Twitter dust yeah so I said depends on
his altitude I was going Mach 25 when I
left the ISS on a spacewalk and that was
just fine oh that's true which is a lot
faster
so and it was interesting to see this
whole thing unfold because people chose
sides they so did there was like Tyson
you've never been in space so I'm siding
with the guy who's been in space and
other people said you can't duck the
laws of physics so I it right right down
the middle I think yeah and they thought
it was just like beef like we hated each
other I don't it's ask question because
the internet thrives on just that kind
of let me let me ask you a an
astrophysicist question you going to
leave this dangling here okay that's
fine no he's going 18,000 mil an hour uh
with this no air and he not suffering
anything because there's no air because
there's no air right yeah you're talking
about a a winged airplane using air as
as a lift and ejecting at 10,000
whatever it isck be 7,000 mph there's
almost no air when a where a Mach 10
airplane would fly they would fly very
high you can't do that at low altitude
but that's kind of the whole point where
there's less air you can go faster so
that you're still intersecting the
requisite air molecules to measure the
fact that you're going mach 10 what I
want next time you're driving down the
street yes 60 M hour roll down the
window yes or oh sorry how do you open
Windows oh lower the window lower the
window with the button stick your hand
out just like that you can barely hold
your hand straight against 60 M hour air
that is a hard thing to accomplish now
increase the speed of that air by a
factor of 100 you'd stick your hand out
there your hand will just blow away
separated from your arm and you're going
to he we we've missed 100 mph winds here
but they happen all the time yeah now
pick up where you going with your
question okay the universe is expanding
all measurements tell us that okay where
so the the the the uh the star system
that we saw we think is the original one
is the farthest away 13.8 billion years
away where's it gone where's it going
that star system we see it not as it
is today but as it once was 13.8 billion
years ago cuz that light is only now
just reaching Jesus you yesterday you
said that it's instantaneous I mean you
got to have the rules follow the rules
here so wait a minute so that still is
my question there only more compounded
so I'm looking at light from that Galaxy
13.8 billion years away and it's another
third it's 26
it's
29.6 light years away now billion so
what so what's going on is there's the
light you see from objects formed at the
beginning of the universe only now just
reaching us today that object is way
farther away from us than that so the
universe is far larger see that the the
measurements of the universe is far
larger it's like 90 nearly 100 billion
light years across so it's like
immeasurably big so what
space
gotcha It's the final
frontier mik drop on
that let me say Scott it was fun doing a
little dust up with you on Twitter just
to see how people chose sides right they
thought we were just enemies and they
wanted to watch it happen but it was fun
it was a it was a highly uh educational
moment for people see what what's going
on there all Bill yes you're my man you
are my man you are you are a treasure
not only to me but to everyone assembled
here on this ship to the country and to
the world Your Enthusiasm your boyish
curiosity child childlike curiosity is
infectious like it it is contagious it's
I don't want to use these biologically
bad words it is uh it's yeah it's
contagious great it's contagious to us
all that's wonderful you're this past
year you had your 93rd birthday is that
my birthday is March 22nd so it's not
that far away you be 94 it'll be 94 and
you we have there's a documentary called
you can call me Bill that's out and
round the round making its rounds right
now it's it's really good and I was with
you for the New York premiere of that
which I delighted in just to uh and just
if I can steal another minute here could
you
tell us all recount for us all as you
did in the
film what were you thinking after they
cancelled Star Trek after its third
season we haven't yet landed on the moon
and you're living out of a trailer
trying to did I tell that story in the
film or make it or maybe you told me I
don't but you had a
trailer in regional theater trying to
make a book I have three children
they're going to school I was getting
divorced as it was being as the show was
being cancelled I was broke I couldn't
write a $15 check at the end of star
trep I had a I I acquired I think I
bought it an old truck with a cab on the
back and a dog a doberman and I drove
and I put together a summer uh theater
show and I drove across the country to
the cape can Cape uh uh
Boston and did Summer theater for 13
weeks turned around headed back home to
go back to my family made a point of
calling my agent every day from a gas
station put the quarters in and he said
oh Rose Kennedy wants you to come to a
party can you come I said well I'm on
the road like tell I can't come to a
party I got to go see my kid all right
call me tomorrow I called him tomorrow
he says I'm telling you Rose Kennedy
wants you to come to the Kennedy party
and the thing over I can't come I get to
Phoenix call him he says they'll send an
airplane for you had I not been so
blinded by coming home in this Pilots
know about the danger of coming of home
hitas is it where you you sacrifice the
rules to get home you're so anxious I
sacrificed the rules I could have asked
her send the plane to Arizona Fly me to
Los Angeles pick up my kids fly back to
New York meet the cedes and fly me back
I didn't think of it and and that was my
my journey my initiation after Star Trek
so it went to a low and that it has been
ascending ever since I've I've had good
luck ever since and of course you have
the book to boldly go was it boldly go
but there's more than one book out there
okay yeah all right we look for those
and Scott what projects you have going
right now I do a bunch of public
speaking I'm on some uh you know
advisory boards okay you know I write a
little I have some other book ideas I
need to he's a wonderful public speaker
he's perfect in front of an audience
guys thanks for coming back onto Star
Talk yeah that's great so this has been
star talk live in a voyage sponsored by
the future of space an organization
that's trying to connect us to
exploration absolutely and this is the
inaugural Voyage of space to see trip to
Antarctica which brought the three of us
together fortuitously fortuitously yes I
am Neil degrass Tyson your a personal
astrophysicist and as always I bid you
to keep looking up
[Applause]
[Music]